README.md, before:

# Justinjdaniel.com

[![Netlify Status](https://api.netlify.com/api/v1/badges/161563c0-f086-473c-a2ed-d13c599183d4/deploy-status)](https://app.netlify.com/sites/justinjdaniel/deploys)
[![Open in Visual Studio Code](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?logo=visualstudiocode&label=&message=Open%20in%20Visual%20Studio%20Code&labelColor=2c2c32&color=007acc&logoColor=007acc)](https://open.vscode.dev/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.github.io)
[![Open in Codespace](https://img.shields.io/badge/Open%20in-Codespace-blue?logo=visual-studio-code)](https://github.com/codespaces)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.github.io/blob/main/LICENSE)

This repository contains the source code and content for my personal portfolio website. You can view it live at <https://justinjdaniel.com/>.

<!-- ## Features

- Responsive design
- Dark mode
- Customizable sections
- Animated transitions
- Contact form -->

## Technologies

This project uses [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/), a React framework that enables hybrid static and server rendering, fast refresh, code splitting, built-in CSS support, and more. To learn more about Next.js, you can visit their [documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs) or [blog](https://nextjs.org/blog).

## Installation

To run this website locally, you need to have [Git](https://git-scm.com/), [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/), and [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) installed on your machine.

1. Clone this repository using the following command:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.com.git
```

2. Navigate to the project folder and install the dependencies using the following command:

```bash
npm install
```

3. Start the development server using the following command:

```bash
npm run dev
```

4. Open <http://localhost:3000> in your web browser to view the website.

Alternatively, you can use [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with the [Live Server](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ritwickdey.LiveServer) extension to launch the website.

## Contribution

If you find any issues or have any suggestions for improvement, feel free to open an issue or a pull request. I appreciate your feedback and support.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](https://github.com/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.github.io/blob/main/LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

docs(readme): updated readme with new badges and content

README.md, after:

# [Justinjdaniel.com](https://open.vscode.dev/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.com)

[![Netlify Status](https://api.netlify.com/api/v1/badges/161563c0-f086-473c-a2ed-d13c599183d4/deploy-status)](https://app.netlify.com/sites/justinjdaniel/deploys)
[![Vercel deployment](https://img.shields.io/github/deployments/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.com/production?label=vercel&logo=vercel&logoColor=white)](https://vercel.com/deployments/justinjdaniel.com)
[![Next.js version](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/justinjdaniel/justinjdaniel.com/next/main?color=ff4088&label=next.js&logo=nextdotjs&logoColor=white)](https://nextjs.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.com/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![GitHub repo size](https://img.shields.io/github/repo-size/justinjdaniel/justinjdaniel.com?color=009cdf&label=repo%20size&logo=git&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/justinjdaniel/justinjdaniel.com)

[![Open in Visual Studio Code](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?logo=visualstudiocode&label=&message=Open%20in%20Visual%20Studio%20Code&labelColor=2c2c32&color=007acc&logoColor=007acc)](https://open.vscode.dev/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.com)
[![Open in Codespace](https://img.shields.io/badge/Open%20in-Codespace-blue?logo=visual-studio-code)](https://github.com/codespaces)

This repository contains the source code and content for my personal portfolio website. You can view it live at <https://justinjdaniel.com/>.

<!-- ## Features

- Responsive design
- Dark mode
- Customizable sections
- Animated transitions
- Contact form -->

## Technologies

This project uses [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/), a React framework that enables hybrid static and server rendering, fast refresh, code splitting, built-in CSS support, and more. To learn more about Next.js, you can visit their [documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs) or [blog](https://nextjs.org/blog).

It also uses [Chakra UI](https://chakra-ui.com/), a simple, modular and accessible component library that gives you the building blocks to build your React applications with speed. Chakra UI follows WAI-ARIA standards, supports light and dark modes, and offers a rich set of components and hooks. You can explore the [components](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/components) or the [guides](https://chakra-ui.com/guides) to get started with Chakra UI.

Another key technology in this project is [Framer Motion](https://www.framer.com/motion/), a powerful motion library for React. Framer Motion allows you to create declarative animations, complex gestures, scroll-triggered effects, and layout animations with ease. It also supports server-side rendering and has a simple yet expressive syntax. You can check out the [examples](https://www.framer.com/motion/examples/) or the [documentation](https://www.framer.com/motion/documentation/) to learn more about Framer Motion.

## Installation

To run this website locally, you need to have [Git](https://git-scm.com/), [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/), and [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) installed on your machine.

1. Clone this repository using the following command:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.com.git
```

2. Navigate to the project folder and install the dependencies using the following command:

```bash
npm install
```

3. Start the development server using the following command:

```bash
npm run dev
```

4. Open <http://localhost:3000> in your web browser to view the website.

Alternatively, you can use [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with the [Live Server](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ritwickdey.LiveServer) extension to launch the website.

## Contribution

If you find any issues or have any suggestions for improvement, feel free to open an issue or a pull request. I appreciate your feedback and support.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](https://github.com/Justinjdaniel/Justinjdaniel.com/blob/main/LICENSE) file for details.
